Welcome to the Actor part of the Reactive Programming course.
This week we will learn about the Actor model.
That means what Actors are, how they interact, what they can
do, and in general, how you can structure your computations using Actors.
Last week, we saw what reactive streams can do for us.
How data flow in them from producers to consumers.
How they are transformed, filtered, how streams
can be merged.
But it all goes more or less in one direction.
Actors give you more freedom than that.
Because they can collaborate and communicate just like we humans do.
In particular we will talk about how actors can create other actors.
How they change their behavior over on time, how they exchange messages.
And in the end, we will conclude with a lesson about how to test
Actor systems.
So that you are well equipped to solve the exercises.
Before we dive into what Actors are, let us first take a
look at why we want to investigate them, and where they came from.
The Actor formalism was first published by Hewitt, Bishop, and Steiger in 1973.
And what they wanted to achieve is to create a model
in which they can formulate the
programs for their artificial intelligence research.
One of Hewitt's students published his Ph.D thesis in 1986.
Gul Agha formulated Actor languages, so how to write down Actor
programs, how to reason about them.
He described communication patterns between Actors, and
how to use them to solve real problems.
In the same year, Ericsson started
developing a programming language named Erlang.
This is a purely functional programming language,
whose concurrency model is based on Actors.
And which was then subsequently used in commercial products.
In 1995, Ericsson presented their new telecommunications platform.
Which was highly successful.
It quoted a reliability of 9 9ths, which means that
there was only about 30 miliseconds of downtime per year.
This robustness and resilience was made possible by the Actor model.
Inspired by the success of Ericsson's Erlang, Philipp Haller
added Actors to the Scala standard library in 2006.
Jonas Bonér was then influenced by Erlang, as well
as the Scala Actors to create Akka in 2009.
Akka is a active framework on the JVM with Java and Scala
APIs making the Actor model available to a wide range of developers.
Actors are applicable in a wide range of problems.
And we will see that in the following sessions.
But we, before we go there, let me first show
you a few problems which motivate our use of Actors.
In the past, programs just got faster by using the next generation of CPUs.
This was due to an ever increasing core frequency.
But this came to a halt around the year 2005.
Since then, CPUs are not getting faster, they're getting wider.
This means that instead of making one execution core more
powerful, multiple such cores are incorporated
within one chip, accessing shared memory.
And in some of these, the cores are even virtualized such
that one physical execution core can host multiple logical execution threads.
There are different ways to benefit from these wider CPUs.
The first one is that you can run multiple programs
in parallel on the same computer.
This is called multi-tasking, and has been done since the first versions of Unix.
But
if you have a single program which you need to execute faster, and
you have no choice but to run parts of the same program in parallel.
And this is called multi-threading.
In order to achieve multithreading, your program must be
written in a different way than the traditional sequential form.
The difference between running separate programs in parallel, and using threads
of the same program in parallel, is
that these threads collaborate on a common task.
And if you think about a group of people
doing something together, they will need to synchronize their actions.
Otherwise they step on each others toes.
The same can happen in a multi-threaded program.
There are a new class of bugs and problems which await you there.
And this
is the reason why programs need to be
formulated differently in order to be ready for multi-threading.
In order to understand what that means, let us take a look at
the good old bank account which was introduced by Martin a few weeks back.
This is the class.
I just copied it.
It contains a field for the balance, and it has two methods to deposit some amount,
and to withdraw some amount.
Now let us look at the withdraw method in detail.
I have marked out here, specifically the places where
the balance is read, and where it is written to.
So let us take a look at what happens,
if two threads run this code at the same time.
I am making little table here.
Let's say this is thread 1, and this is thread 2.
They are executed by different CPUs, so can run really and parallel.
They enter the method with an amount.
Let us say that thread 1 wants to withdraw 50 Swiss francs for example.
And thread 2 wants to withdraw 40.
The first thing they will both do is read the current balance.
In both cases, let us say the balance is right now 80, so they will both see 80.
Then both will enter the if statement, the check.
Is the amount positive? Yes it is.
And are there actually sufficient funds in the account?
Yes there are.
So both will continue. They will calculate the new balance.
The new balance in the first thread will be 30, and in the second will be
40. The next thing the threads will do is they
will write back the new balance, into the balance field of the bank account, object.
The first thread will write 30, and the second will write 40.
This is clearly in conflict, because only one of the writes can win in the end.
The one which comes last, will overwrite the one which came earlier.
This is the first problem which we see here.
It is that one of the updates to the balance is actually lost.
The other problem is that the invariant of the bank account is violated.
In that we have withdrawn 50 and 40 Swiss francs which is 90
in sum, and the balance was only 80, which should not have been possible.
One of the threads should have failed.
And that, that did not happen is the other problem with this code.
Now what can we do to fix this problem? We need to add synchronization.
When multiple threads
are working with the same data, they need to synchronize their actions.
Because otherwise they would be prone to step on each other's toes.
What we need to do is to make sure that when
one thread is working with the data, the others keep out.
Like you put a don't disturb sign on your hotel door.
So let's say in this example we're looking at the balance,
as the data to be protected. And what we need to do
[SOUND]
is to put a fence around it, so that when one thread is working with the data, say
thread 1. That this one has exclusive access to it.
Which means threat 2 here, if it tries to access the data, it will
actually be denied access at this time. And it has to wait
until threat 1 is finished with it. This way, the balance will be protected.
And all modifications done on it are done
in a consistent fashion, one after the other.
We also say serialized.
The primary tools for achieving this kind of synchronization are lock or mutex.
Which is basically the same concept as shown just previously.
Or a semaphore where the difference is that multiple but
only a defined number of threads can enter this region.
In Scala, every object has an associated lock.
Which you can access by calling the synchronized method on it.
And it accepts a code lock which will be executed in this protected region.
How do we apply this to the bank account to make it synchronized?
Well, we have the withdraw method here.
And if we put all of it inside
of a synchronized block, then reading the balance here.
Performing the check and writing it back, will all be done as one atomic action.
Which cannot be disturbed by another thread executing withdraw,
at the same time. That other thread will have to wait.
But why do we have synchronized also here on the deposit method?
The deposit method also modifies the balance.
And if it was not synchronized, then it could modify it without protection.
And once the withdrawal writes the balance back here, it would
override the override the update performed by deposit at the same time.
This is to illustrate that
all accesses to balance need to be synchronized, and not
just the one which we have proven to be problematic.
Now, let us try to transfer some money from one bank account to another.
What we need to do is to synchronize
both objects, such that they're in a consistent state.
Because otherwise, someone reading the balance of
the accounts could find the money in flight.
We withdraw from one account. We deposit later into another one.
During this time, the money is basically nowhere.
And if the invariant which needs to be enforced, is that the sum
of from and to needs to be the same, this will be violated.
Hence, we need to synchronize.
So first we take the lock on the from account.
Then we take the lock on
the to account.
Now we are safe that no other thread can modify these two accounts, but we can.
One property of locks in Scala is that they are reentrant, meaning
that the same thread can take it twice or any number of times.
it's just a protection against other threads.
There is a problem with this code, in
that it introduces the possibility of a deadlock.
Let us say that one thread wants to transfer
from account A to account B in one thread.
And another thread tries to transfer in the opposite direction.
If both start at the same time, they take the first
lock, this one on account A, this one on account B.
Then they go on to take the other lock.
This one will not succeed in taking the lock, because
it was already taken by the other thread for account B.
The same is true for account A in the other thread.
This means that none of the threads can
make progress, they will both be stuck forever.
Because there is no chance that either of
them will yield the lock they already have.
This is called a deadlock.
There are solutions for this deadlock.
For example, to always take the locks in the same order.
You need to define an ordering for accounts and so on.
and then you could potentially solve this.
You will find that there are most of the time solutions of that kind,
but they will aggregate and make your code much more complicated over time.
And in this
case, it is simple, because both are bank accounts.
But what if you want objects to collaborate which do not come
from the same code base, for example, in which you cannot modify?
In that sense, it would be much better
if our objects would not require blocking synchronization.
Because blocking is what really makes the deadlock happen.
Because one thread gets blocked on the lock.
The other problem with blocking, is that it is bad for CPU utilization.
If there are other threads to run, then the operating system will run them.
But otherwise, the CPU will be idle.
And, waking it up, or getting a thread back to run
when some other thread has interrupted it, takes a lot of time.
So your program will run slower if you use blocking.
Another problem with blocking objects
is that synchronous communication couples sender and receiver, quite strongly.
Because the sender needs to wait until the receiver is ready.
So if I call a bank account which is synchronized,
that bank account will block me until it is ready.
Non-blocking objects are exactly what Actors are.
And we will see that in the next lecture.